Kevin sits at the edge of the bench so
that when he lays down into position
he doesn't bang his head on the barbell
I guarantee someone's gonna bang their
head on the barbell today because he
didn't listen to that cue he's got a
slide back so his head falls off the
bench from this position he grabs the
bar in his preferred grip which is index
finger on the outer ring of a
powerlifting bar that's the maximum
legal with grip in a powerlifting
competition but it just so happens that
without a power lifting competition this
is kind of the size of the racks and if
you go wider than that you're gonna jam
your fingers in the uprights okay so
that is regardless of whether you're a
power lifter or not that's the maximum
with that I will ever teach you okay if
that's too wide for you which I'm going
to teach you how to determine that later
you are welcome to go a little bit
closer but Kevin is very strong he's
very conditioned that's a comfortable
position for him index finger on the
outer ring of the powerlifting bar with
his head off the bench that's the start
point the reason why is that far back he
said that he can get his feet far enough
back to set up in the position that we
want which is going to be quite far back
okay up on the balls of these fates from
this position he's gonna push his heels
downwards I need you to understand his
heels on touching the ground this is a
technique that I teach it's not a flat
foot benchpress he feels on touching the
ground but there is downwards pressure
through his heels the entire time with
that downwards pressure he's going to be
pushing his heels down and sliding into
position heels down the same time
sliding into position using the barbell
to slide into position he ends up with
his eye level he's behind the bar heels
down throughout the entire movement okay
he then focuses on squeezing his
shoulder blades back and down towards
the back pocket okay
retraction and depression of the scapula
he's going to hold that position
throughout the entire rep from start to
the entire set I should say from start
to finish
okay heels down shoulder blades back and
down from here we take a big breath and
hold it and then we unrack okay pulling
the bar to his start position five reps
holding his breath the entire movement
heels down the entire movements caps
back and down towards
pockets the entire movement notice he's
not just dropping the bar on his chest
the way that we teach this is to pull
the bar apart same as spreading the
floor in a bench and a squat pulling the
bar apart in a benchpress to ensure that
he's not just dropping the weight okay
he's using his muscles to control the
weight to his chest
okay didn't stay there but just relax
did you see his body is now flat he's
not in that arch position okay heels
down okay
well lift his chest up okay and relax
any questions yes for the correct answer
to this I know where you're getting at
the correct answer to this is it depends
in a competition as long as he's buddies
on the bench he's feet on the ground
he's off the back is on the bet you
can't do a bench press without your
upper back on the bench all right so
he's I'll be back we'll be on the bench
but he's but on the bench he's feet on
the floor you can add as much as you
want you can have an arch this high and
benchpress one centimeter if you have
that mobility that's legal and that
doesn't make him whole if he's able to
achieve that but if all I do is train
that movement exclusively with Kevin the
range of note of motion is not big
enough to strengthen his body so with
someone with an arch as good as Kevin we
would include other accessory exercises
that strengthen the joint the shoulder
joint through the ranges of motion that
we're unable to achieve with the
benchpress movement okay so if he wasn't
arching as well as what he was he would
have a less longer range of motion okay
which technically would be able to build
a little bit more muscle mass than the
shorter labor technique that we're
teaching but that's not all Kevin does
in fact I don't know if it was I don't
think it was just for this seminar but
last week he did how many kilo dumbbell
press how many reps seven aquila
dumbbell press for eight reps through a
full range of motion the arch doesn't
make it
friends to the range of motion in a
dumbbell press because bringing the
chest up doesn't touch the dumbbells it
touches a barbell so we use other
exercises as supplementary movements for
someone like Kevin like if Kevin is my
athlete he doesn't just benchpress okay
he has a higher focus on other exercises
that's our favorite exercise to
complement the benchpress when we're
talking about shoulder health taking the
joints through its full range of motion
okay is a dumbbell press with a neutral
grip on all angles so upright incline
flat he does a lot of that as well so
he's actually strong and very technical
with his movement we need both okay
strengthening strength competition is
very specific if you're not power lifter
if you arched like that I'd say that's a
pretty cool trick you want to do that
for fun like we can keep doing that and
and you know you can be a badass with a
cool benchpress like it's a cool thing
it's a sport like think of it as a sport
you know some people out there play team
sports for fitness not because they're
gonna be professional one day okay some
people do it for fitness and for health
and for feeling great about themselves
okay so bench pressing is a sport even
if you don't compete professionally okay
so if you came to me didn't have an
interest on being a power lifts up you
could still have a goal of having a
great benchpress
if you had an arch like that I'd promote
it I'd say [__] yeah keep going
like let's get you a hundred forty kilo
benchpress with that arch what am I
gonna doing them background I'm still
gonna train your upper body for
structural balance take your short
shoulder joint through its full range of
motion on all angles push and pull
okay strengthen the external rotators of
shoulder joint and strengthen the
stabilizers of the scapula so that the
rotator cuff muscles can do their job
let's do it again
take a sit on the edge of the bench so
when he lays down
he hasn't bang his head on the bar
sliding into position so his head comes
off the bench grabbing the bar and his
desired grip okay the wider the grip the
lower the range of motion the higher the
potential for lifting the heaviest
weight possible
okay slide with these feet back up in
the balls of your cities gonna push his
heels down and keep that downwards
pressures throughout the entire movement
sliding into position which is where his
eyeballs will end up behind the bar
pushing his heels down pulling his
shoulder blades back and down taking a
big breath and controlling the bar to
his start point controlling the bar down
to his chest not just dropping it to his
chest he does that by imagining he's
pulling the bar apart and the angle of
the elbow let's talk a little bit about
this okay has anyone heard of the cue to
tuck your elbows yeah they don't know
why we do that yeah protect the child
what does protect the child of me yeah
cool turn around okay what we've got
that's the scapula on the scapula sits
our rotator cuff muscles okay the bony
line here that's called the spine of the
scapula above that there's a muscle
what's that called supraspinatus okay
the supraspinatus comes underneath here
travels under the acromion and attaches
to the top of the humerus when we have
ducked our humerus to 90 degrees we've
closed that space between the humerus
and the acromion where that
supraspinatus tendon travels through so
now we have two bones rubbing on this
muscle on this tendon and that's not
what that tendon is designed to do we
rub down by two bones so if we tuck the
elbows we're creating more space for
that tender to move through does that
make sense but this is this is one of
the parts of tucking the elbows when we
say it's designed to protect the
shoulder okay now you understand a
little bit of the anatomy behind it okay
the next thing that the lats do I want
you to understand this when we add duct
to 90 degrees enough we're turning our
lats off
I put traps on lats off okay so we don't
want retraction with upper trapezius we
want a retraction with lower trapezius
okay because then we can recruit our
lats as well which are going to depress
the head of the humerus away from there
glenoid fossa so take this ball out of
the socket slightly so that it can move
freely and not rub tendons between these
two bones so this is why we tuck the
elbow joint
this is tucked this is tucked
this is tunt ok2say 45 degrees like it
depends does that make sense I don't
teach flared elbows and I don't usually
give the cue of tucking elbows a lot of
people come to me bench press here okay
this is in the position where we can
recruit our strongest pushing muscles
possible this becomes a powerful tricep
exercise and I want this to be a tricep
exercise I don't want it to be a PEC
exercise I want it to be the most
comfortable pushing exercise that we
have okay so a lot of the cues that
exist you may not hear me say especially
if the lifter is already doing it some
lifters start here and I give them the
cue flare the elbows
what takes will you ever read anywhere
in the world that says that flared
elbows is the right technique for
benchpress it doesn't exist and I would
not write a book that said that either
it doesn't exist but you may hear me
teach my lifter who presses here to
flare his elbows that make sense not
because I want him to be at 90 degrees
abduction of his shoulder joint okay
because that's going to impinge when I
talk about force couple relationships
they don't get in the hatch position and
just stay there for a little bit okay
let's start from the feet and go all the
way up to the hands
he's feed it back he's pushing his heels
down what action is this at the hip
joint
okay relax chest drops extension of the
hip joint creates what are the pelvis
anterior pelvic tilt what's the
relationship between anterior pelvic
tilt and the lumbar spine
extension of the spine okay I want relax
I want you guys to arch your back please
just sit down and just to show you back
where did your shoulder blades go
did I tell you to do that or did it just
happen okay so this is me getting his
feet to talk to his shoulder blades
right now so extension in the back
extension of the thoracic is paired with
retraction depression of the scapula now
in a sport like martial arts throwing
sports okay
the force Cup relationship with this
movement okay is protraction elevation
of the scapula
so make sense so that's richer so in a
row retract the press push protract
elevate so scapula goes up here in a
press or a punch or a throw okay and it
comes back and down or retraction the
press inner in a pulling movement that's
called human movement he's not throwing
a ball he's not throwing a punch he's
lifting a heavy object of his chest with
the board jamming his scapula out of
position so this is where we say we got
Anatomy
we got biomechanics we got human
movement and then we got all of that
combined with lifting a heavy weight
having a heavy barbell in your hands
okay his so correct human movement would
say at the end of the bench press he
should be protracting and elevating
scapula okay do that here's benchpress
and just protracting elevate your
scapula just a normal set up on racket
okay bring it down normally perfectly
now press and protracted and okay this
is the comp the most common error that
we see in bench press and this is
shoulder injury waiting to happen
okay from this position 60 kilos she's
okay
from his just trying load the bar down
to your chest okay he's scapula is out
of position look at the range of motion
that we've done yeah take it off I don't
even like watching that okay
the risk of injury of that for sixty
kilos for someone as strong as Kevin is
very low because he's strong enough okay
you get a heavy weight and you get him
to protract your scapula like that the
risk of injury is incredibly high it's
all relative
okay what happens is the protraction and
elevation of the scapula now with heavy
weight in your hands has a board jamming
his scapula out of position he will
never be able to retract in the press to
the exact position
when the barbells on his chest that the
scapula is supposed to be at
so his scapula is going to be jammed out
of position while he brings the bar down
to his chest so this is me that we're
gonna get we're gonna get him pinned
ruin of the shoulder joint okay this is
why because we have a board jamming the
scapula out of position this is why we
need to set up from start to finish with
the scapula in the safest position
throughout even though it's not human
movement okay put your arms out in front
okay your protracted and elevated
because that's human movement retracting
the press good so when you're retracted
the press so just as extension of the
thumb of the thoracic spine is paired
with retraction with depression of the
scapula vice versa is also true okay so
I got you to retracting the presses
scapula and you extend your thoracic
spine yeah
okay so I go hand-in-hand okay now do it
again he's homework for you I gave you
the homework last night I know if you
did it okay retract the [__] scapula
maintain that position keep it there and
retaining your bench pressing
don't let the scapula's protract one
millimeter
okay I'm not teaching you how to bench
press 60 kilograms I'm teaching you how
to rep out double body weight okay if
you want to rap out double body weight
or have the highest potential for your
bench press or for any of your movements
which I teach you okay one percent
matters okay
so we're aiming to reduce the range of
motion on an exercise like this where
there's a board jamming is scapula in an
unsafe position if I got you to do
another exercise like push up a dip okay
dumbbell press I like that full movement
of the scapulae okay push-ups where you
protract at the end okay dibs where you
protract at the end okay I like that
but we don't have a board jamming our
scapular out of position with those
movements okay and if you take your
joints through a full range of movement
thinking that you're doing a good thing
for the muscle you're not with the bench
press with a board jamming escapes out
of position you're not doing a good
thing for the joint I still want to get
him to go slightly heavier each set so
that you can see the difference
from an elite bench presser how it looks
from an empty bar all the way through to
a top weight okay
let's tell him what to do stand stay
there tell him what to do why do we want
him on the edge of the bench so it
doesn't bang his head okay great lay
down where do I want him to lay with his
head off the bench why do I want his
head off the bench so he can bring his
feet back into position okay stop come
back head there if you start here and
bring your feet back into position you
can't get them back far enough the
further back the feet the greater the
extension that hip joint okay
I'm maximizing his range of motion sorry
minimizing his range of motion okay I'm
taking his body through its full range
of motion okay by bringing his feet back
as far as they can go to maximize his
arch okay slide back so your heads off
the bench bring your feet back so that
what on your balls of your feet good to
get up on the balls of your feet and
then push the heels down are they gonna
touch the ground so what his heels down
mean extension of the hip joint right so
I want downwards pressure of the heels
throughout the entire movement to create
the extension in the hip joint as hard
as possible okay good pushing the heels
down now what he's going to slide into
position so his eyes are just behind the
bar great why do I want his eyes just
behind the bar what's a variation of
something that you may have learnt or
something you may teach where do we line
up eyes under the bar okay why eyes
under the bar that's why I say eyes
behind the bar because I don't want to
move that far it's one racket but most
people it's kind of like a logical
landmark to have the eyes under the bar
yeah okay the heads there I want to
bring the bar out of that squat right
out of that benchpress rack without
bumping on sit on the uprights okay so
we want to be fired down here enough so
so this doesn't get in our way if you're
a novice lift
okay some novice lifters man may need to
be all the way down here Kevin's an
advanced lifter I want him to move as
little as possible with his unrack okay
why why do I want him to move as little
as possible with his unrack relax say
that again
maximize efficiency great so why would
that so the answer that she just gave
was it doesn't pull the escapes out of
position why would being down here pull
the escapes out of position because you
have to reach further so reaching
further like a punch or a throw does
what to the scapula elevates and
protract the scapula what happens when
we elevate retract the scapula
put a heavy load at our hands and then
try and retract and depress the scapula
we ain't getting at you not necessarily
injury won't go that far but it's
potential for injury but we're not going
to be able to set our scapular in the
right position because you've got a
board jamming em out of position so
while we are unloaded we need to jam a
scapula in position okay slide back so
his head's off the bench so you can get
his feet in the right position up on the
balls of his feet he's got to push his
heels down and maintain that downwards
pressure throughout the entire movement
from now they're not allowed to lift up
good heels down slides down until his
eyes are behind the bar so that he
doesn't have to travel so far it's one
rack to that weight come heels down okay
now what oh yeah scabs what what are we
telling to do retract into press his
scapula okay pull your shoulder blades
back and down towards the back pocket
okay
heels down scaps back and down take a
big breath pulling the bar apart he's
holding his breath the whole time he's
controlling that white to his chest who
just give me four ribs that cheese chest
under control and powering that white
back up okay look at the speed on the
way up good he's not uncontrollably
exploding that weight up which is
something that I see a lot of and I'm
sure I'm gonna see it today even though
I said it now okay one of the Contin
most common areas that I see is people
punching it so hard because they're
training to be explosive which is a
fantastic idea okay
not if it's going to interfere with your
achieving perfect position okay position
precision technique tension then we add
speed